---
title: "Number"
description: "Number data type in Java"
sidebar_position: 4
---
# Numbers

Primitive number types are divided into two groups:

- _Integer types_ stores whole numbers, positive or negative (such as 123 or -456), without decimals. 
	- Valid types are:- `byte, short, int and long`. 
	- Which type you should use, depends on the numeric value.

- _Floating point types_ represents numbers with a fractional part, containing one or more decimals. 
	- There are two types: `float and double`.


## 1. Integer types
### Byte

The `byte` data type can store whole numbers from -128 to 127. 
This _can be used instead of `int` or other integer types to save memory_ when you are certain that the value will be within -128 and 127:

- Example:-
```java
byte myNum = 100;
System.out.println(myNum);
```

---
### Short
The `short` data type can store whole numbers from -32768 to 32767:

- Example
```java
short myNum = 5000;
System.out.println(myNum);
```

---
### Int

The `int` data type can store whole numbers from -2147483648 to 2147483647. In general, and in our tutorial, the `int` data type is the preferred data type when we create variables with a numeric value.

- Example
```java
int myNum = 100000;
System.out.println(myNum);
```

---

### Long

The `long` data type can store whole numbers from -9223372036854775808 to 9223372036854775807. 
This is used when int is not large enough to store the value. Note that you should end the value with an "L":

- Example
```java
long myNum = 15000000000L;
System.out.println(myNum);
```
---

## 2. Float Types
You should use a floating point type whenever you need a number with a decimal, such as 9.99 or 3.14515.

:::note[When use float & when double?]
The **precision** of a floating point value indicates how many digits the value can have after the decimal point. 
The precision of `float` is only six or seven decimal digits, while `double` variables have a precision of about 16 digits. Therefore it is safer to use `double` for most calculations.
:::

###  Float
- ends with f
```java
float myNum = 5.75f;
System.out.println(myNum);
```

---
### Double
- ends with d
```java
double myNum = 19.99d;
System.out.println(myNum);
```

---
###  Scientific Numbers

A floating point number can also be a scientific number with an "e" to indicate the power of 10:

- Example:-
```java
float f1 = 35e3f;   // e3 indicates number of 0s, so 35000.0
double d1 = 12E4d;  // 120000.0

System.out.println(f1);
System.out.println(d1);
```

---