---
title: Java Internal Notes
sidebar_position: 2
description: Short answers for Java theory exam preparation.
---
## What are the key features of Object-Oriented Programming (OOP)?

Key features of OOP are:

- **Encapsulation**: Wrapping data and methods into single unit(class).
- **Abstraction**: Hiding internal implementation details from user.
- **Inheritance**: Allowing new classes to derive properties from existing classes.
- **Polymorphism**: Enabling a single interface to represent multiple implementation.

---

## What is Java

Java is a high level, robust, object-oriented and secure programming language.

- Java was developed by **Sun Microsystems** (which is now the subsidiary of Oracle) in the **year 1995**.
- **James Gosling** is known as the father of Java.

---

## What is Java Bytecode?

Java Bytecode is an intermidiate representation of a java program generated after compilation. It's not Machine specific & is executed by JVM(Java Virtual Machine), making Java platform-independent.

---

## 3. What are the commands of compiling and running a Java program?

If we have a program named `MyProgram.java`, the commands to compile and run it are:

- Compiling: `javac MyProgram.java`, this will create a `MyProgram.class` file.
- Running: `java MyProgram`, this will execute the `MyProgram` program.

---

## 4. Write the meaning of “public static void main(String args[])”

This is the main method which serves as the entry point for Java applications.

- `public`: Accessible from anywhere.
- `static`: No object needed to call it.
- `void`: Returns nothing.
- `main`: Entry point of the program.
- `String[] args`: Command line arguments.

---

## 5. What is JVM?

The Java Virtual Machine (JVM) is a platform-independent virtual machine that executes Java bytecode. It provides the runtime environment necessary for Java programs to run on any OS with a compatible JVM implementation. Its platform independence is a core feature of the Java language

- The JVM loads, verifies, executes bytecode, manages memory (including garbage collection), and provides essential runtime services.

---

## 6. Why is Java called a portable language?

Java is called portable because its compiled bytecode can run on any device that has a compatible JVM implementation.  
This makes Java programs platform-independent, following the principle "Write Once, Run Anywhere"

---

## 7. What is an array?

An array is a data structure that stores a collection of elements of the same data type.

### How is it different in Java?

- **Objects:** In Java, arrays are treated as objects.
- **Fixed Size:** Once an array is created in Java, its size cannot be changed..
- **No Pointer Arithmetic**: Unlike languages like C and C++, Java does not allow direct pointer arithmetic on arrays.

---

## 8. How are strings created in Java?

There are 2 ways of creating strings in Java:

- **Using String Literals**: `String s = "Hello";`
- **Using new keyword**: `String s = new String("Hello");`

---

## 9. What is for-each loop?

The for-each loop in Java, also known as the enhanced for loop, is a simplified control flow statement for iterating over elements in a collection (like list, set or arrays).  
It provides a more concise and readable way to access each elements without explicitly managing iterators.

```java
for (Type var : array) {
  // statements
}
```

---

## 10. Define class and object

### Class

A class is a blueprint for creating objects.  
It defines fields (variables) and methods (functions) that describe the properties and behaviours of an object.

- Example:

```java
 class Car {
    String model;  // Field

    void display() {  // Method
        System.out.println(model);
    }
}
```

### Object

An object is an instance of a class.  
It is a real-world entity that has state (data) and behavior (methods) defined by its class.

- Example:-

```java
Car myCar = new Car();    // Creating an object of the Car class

myCar.model = "Toyota";   // Access field
myCar.display();          // Call method

```

---

## 11. <mark>What is a method?</mark>

In Java, a method is a block of code that performs a specific task or a sequence of operations.  
It's a fundamental building block of a Java program,

### What is method overloading? Give example

Method overloading occurs when multiple methods in the same class have the same name but different parameters.

- **Example**:

```java
class Calculator {
    int add(int a, int b) { return a + b; }
    double add(double a, double b) { return a + b; }
}
```

---

## 12. What is a constructor? Write down its types

In Java, a constructor is a special type of method that is used to initialize objects of a class when they are created. It has the same name as the class and does not have an explicit return type.

**Types**:-

- **Default Constructor**: Constructor with No parameters, automatically provided if no other constructors are defined.
- **Parameterized Constructor**: Accepts arguments to set values. Must be explicitly defined.

---

## 13. What are the properties of a constructor?

- **Same Name**: A constructor always has the same name as the class.
- **No explicit return type**: Constructors do not have a return type, <mark>not even void.</mark>
- **called automatically**: Constructors are called automatically when an object is created.
- **Used to initialize objects**: Constructors are used to set initial values for object.

---

## 14. What is method overriding? Give example

Method overriding is when a subclass provides its own specific implementation for a method that is already defined in its superclass. When we call that method on an object of the subclass, the subclass's version runs.  
It allows subclasses to customize inherited behavior.

**Example**:

```java
class Animal {
  void sound() { System.out.println("Sound"); }
}
class Dog extends Animal {
  void sound() { System.out.println("Bark"); }
}
```

---

## <mark>15. What is an abstract class & abstract method?</mark>

### **Abstract Class**

An abstract class is a class that cannot be instantiated directly.  
It's a blueprint for subclasses and is declared using the **abstract** keyword.

### **Abstract Method**

An abstract method is a method declared in an abstract class (or interface) that has no implementation (no body). It's declared using the abstract keyword and ends with a semicolon.  
Subclasses must provide an implementation for all abstract methods of their abstract superclass

---

## 16. What is inheritance?

Inheritance is the process of acquiring features of an existing class (base class) into a new class (derived class).

### Types of Inheritance

- Single Inheritance
- Multilevel Inheritance
- Hierarchical Inheritance
- Multiple Inheritance(via interfaces)
- Hybrid Inheritance

---

## 17. How can we achieve multiple inheritance in Java?

We can achieve multiple inheritance using **Interfaces**.

```java
interface A { void show(); }
interface B { void display(); }
class C implements A, B { /*...*/ }
```

---

## 18. What is a package? How to  use a package?

A **package** is a  group of similar types of classes, interfaces, and sub-packages.

There are three main ways to use packages:

1. **Using the Fully Qualified Name:**

    ```java
    mypack.MyClass obj = new mypack.MyClass();
    ```

2. **Using the `import` keyword (single class import):**

    ```java
    import mypack.MyClass;
    ```

3. **Importing entire package using wildcard:**

    ```java
    import mypack.*;
    ```

---

## 19. What is an exception? What is exception handling?

Exception is an event that occurs during runtime and disrupts the normal flow of the program. It's essentially an error condition or an unexpected situation that arises at runtime.

### Exception Handling

Exception handling is the process of gracefully managing and responding to exceptions.

```java
try {
  // code
} catch (Exception e) {
  // handle
}
```

---

## 20. What is multiprogramming? How can we achieve multithreading in Java?

Multiprogramming is a technique where multiple programs reside in the computer's memory at the same time. The operating system rapidly switches between them using a small time quantum, giving the illusion of simultaneous execution.

### **Achieving Multithreading**

In java there are two ways to achieve multithreading:

- **Using the Thread class**: Extend the Thread class and override its run() method.
- **Using the Runnable interface**: Implement the Runnable interface and override its run() method.

---

## 21. Write down the lifecycle of a thread

Life-cycle of a thread is New->Runnable->Running->Waiting->Terminated

1. **New:** Thread object created, `start()` not yet called.
2. **Runnable:** Eligible to run, after `start()` is invoked. May be waiting for CPU time.
3. **Running:** Currently executing the `run()` method.
4. **lock/Waiting:** I/O, sleep, lock.
5. **Terminated:** Execution of the `run()` method is complete

---

## 22. What is a file? Write down the basic file-related operations

A file is a place to store data like text, images, or any other type of information on a storage device.

**File Operations**:

- Create a file
- Read from a file
- Write to a file
- Closing a file
- Delete a file

---

## 23. Name the package required for file handling in Java

The primary package required for basic file handling (input and output operations related to files and directories) in Java is `java.io`.

This package contains numerous classes and interfaces that provide functionalities for:

- Reading data from files.
- Writing data to files.  
- Creating and deleting files and directories.
- Getting information about files and directories (existence, size, last modified date, etc.).  
- Working with streams of data.

---

## 24. What is a stream? What are its types?

In Java streams are sequences of data that can be read from source &  written to destination.
An input stream is used to read data, while an output stream is used to write data.

**Stream Types**:

- Byte Stram
- Character Stream

---

## 25. Name any three classes required for handling files

Commonly used classes for file handling in Java include:

1. **File**: Represents a file or directory path for file system operations.
2. **FileInputStream**: Reads raw byte data from a file.
3. **FileWriter**: Writes character data to a file using the default encoding.
